# 2 Python Packages, Virtual Environments and Dependency Management

As a developer, data scientist or data engineer, you will often find yourself working on projects that depend on external libraries. For example, consider a project that uses the `pandas` library for data manipulation and the `scikit-learn` library for machine learning. Both of these libraries have their dependencies, and these dependencies may have their own dependencies, and so on.

Furthermore, it is common for different projects to require different versions of the same library. For example, you may decide to use the latest `pandas` version for a new project that introduces a new feature you need while an older existing project may rely on a feature from an older `pandas` version that is now deprecated. It wouldn't be ideal to have to uninstall and reinstall `pandas` every time you switch between projects.

Wouldn't it be great if you could have tailor-made environments for each project with the exact packages that each project needs? This is where the concept of virtual environments comes in. Virtual environments allow you to create isolated development spaces, enabling different versions of libraries to coexist on the same machine without conflict.

Imagine now that some new colleagues join your project. They will need to install the same libraries and exact versions that you are using. This can be a daunting task, especially if the project has many dependencies. This is where dependency management tools come in. The idea is to make it easy to track all the specific versions of the libraries that your project depends on. This way, you can easily share the exact environment needed to run your project with your colleagues.

In this chapter, we will learn how to manage the requirements of your Python projects with `uv`, a fast, modern tool for Python version management, virtual environments, and dependency management.