---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# 4.2 Python Project Management with Poetry
```{code-cell} python
:tags: [remove-input]
import os
os.chdir('../home')
```
Poetry is a tool designed to simplify the management of Python projects by handling dependency management and packaging in a unified way. Unlike traditional tools that require separate configurations for these tasks, Poetry uses a single `pyproject.toml` file for project specifications, making it easier to manage dependencies, package projects, and publish them to PyPI.

## Benefits of Using Poetry Over Traditional Tools

- **Simplified Dependency Management**: Poetry resolves dependencies more efficiently and accurately, avoiding the common issues of dependency hell.
- **Unified Tool**: Combines features of dependency management and packaging tools into one, eliminating the need for multiple configuration files.
- **Easy Version Management**: Allows specifying version constraints for dependencies in a straightforward manner and handles updates smoothly.
- **Reproducible Builds**: The `poetry.lock` file ensures that your project can be reproduced exactly the same way on any machine.
- **Intuitive CLI**: Offers an easy-to-use command-line interface for managing projects, dependencies, and virtual environments.

## Setting Up Your Project with Poetry

### Installing Poetry and Basic Setup

To install Poetry, run the following command in your terminal:

```bash
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
```

Once installed, you can configure Poetry to suit your needs. For example, setting Poetry to create virtual environments within the project directory:

```bash
poetry config virtualenvs.in-project true
```

### Initialising a New Project with Poetry

Creating a new project is as simple as running:

```bash
poetry new my-project
```

This command creates a new directory called `my-project` with a basic project structure and a `pyproject.toml` file pre-configured.

### Converting a Pre-existing Project to Use Poetry

To convert an existing project to Poetry, navigate to the project's root directory and run:

```bash
poetry init
```

This interactive command will guide you through creating a `pyproject.toml` file for your project. You can specify dependencies and other project settings during this process.

## Project Structure

The structure of your Python project plays a crucial role in its maintainability, scalability, and ease of testing. Two common layouts are used in the Python ecosystem: the `src` layout and the flat layout.

### Understanding flat layout vs the `src` layout

- **Flat Layout**: This layout places the code that is intended to be importable ([the import package](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/distribution-package-vs-import-package/#distribution-package-vs-import-package)) directly in the root directory of the project. While this is straightforward and commonly used in simple projects, it can lead to issues when the package tries to import itself, potentially mixing up the local code with installed versions from site-packages.

```{code-block} bash
my-package-repo-name/
├── CHANGELOG.md             ┐
├── CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md       │
├── CONTRIBUTING.md          │
├── docs/                    │ Package documentation
│   └── ...                  │
├── LICENSE                  │
├── README.md                ┘
├── pyproject.toml           ] Package metadata and build configuration
|   my_package/              ┐
│     ├── __init__.py        │ Package source code
│     ├── moduleA.py         │
│     └── moduleB.py         ┘
└── tests/                   ┐
        └── test-file1.py    | Package tests
        └── ....             ┘
```

WTN: `my_package` is in the root of the project. 

- **`src` Layout**: In the `src` layout, the package code lives in a subdirectory (commonly named `src`). This separation ensures that when you run or test the package, Python imports the installed version of the package (from site-packages) and not the local code directly. This mimics the environment that users of the package will have and can help catch potential issues related to packaging or dependencies.

```{code-block} bash
package-repo-name/
├── CHANGELOG.md               ┐
├── CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md         │
├── CONTRIBUTING.md            │
├── docs                       │ Package documentation
│   └── index.md               |
│   └── ...                    │
├── LICENSE                    │
├── README.md                  ┘
├── pyproject.toml             ] Package metadata and build configuration
├── src                        ┐
│   └── my_package/            │
│       ├── __init__.py        │ Package source code
│       ├── moduleA.py         │
│       └── moduleB.py         ┘
└── tests/                     ┐
   └── ...                     ┘ Package tests
```
### Poetry and the project structure

By default, when we create a new project with

```{code-block} bash
poetry new package-name
```
, poetry uses flat layout. We can change to src layout with the src flag.

```{code-block} bash
poetry new --src package-name
```

## About cases and case conventions:
In the course, we will use:
- kebab case for the project name (and use it also for the remote repository name),
- snake case for the import package name (Poetry converts the project name in kebab case to snake case).

Since valid Python identifiers cannot contain dashes (-), we should avoid using dashes in the import package names.
A valid identifier cannot start with a number, or contain any spaces and can only contain alphanumeric letters (a-z) and (0-9), or underscores (_). 

## List of some relevant cases

Pascal case: e.g., NumberOfPlayers 
Camel case: e.g., numberOfPlayers
Snake case: e.g., number_of_players
Kebab case: e.g., number-of-players
lowercase: e.g., numberofplayers

## What if you already have a project?

If you already have a project, you can use 

```{code-block} bash
cd package-name
poetry init
```

to initialize an already populated directory.

# References
[Python Packaging User Guide](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/#)
[Python Packaging Authority](https://www.pypa.io/en/latest/)
[PyOpenSci](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-structure.html)