---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Bash
  language: bash
  name: bash
---
```{code-cell} bash
:tags: [remove-input]
cd ../home/ch1/my-project
```

# 1.4 Merging Branches
In this section, we'll see how to integrate work from the `feature` branch back into the `main` branch.

## Types of Merges
The two most common merge strategies are fast-forward and three-way merges:
- Fast-forward merge: This merge strategy is used when the target branch can be updated to point to the commit of the source branch without needing to create a new commit.
- Three-way merge: A three-way merge is used when the two branches have diverged and a new commit is required to reconcile the differences.

### Fast-forward merge
Let's first understand visually how a fast-forward merge of the `feature` branch into `main` would look like by comparing the current state of the repository with the state after the merge.

This is how the repository looks like now:

```{mermaid}
flowchart RL
    C2((C2)) --> C1((C1))
    C3((C3)) --> C2
    main --> C2
    feature --> C3
    HEAD{HEAD} --> feature
```

How can we incorporate the changes from `feature` into `main`? If we look at the commit history, we can see that `main` is behind `feature` by one commit. To update `main` with the changes from `feature`, we can simply move the `main` pointer to the same commit as `feature`. This is possible whenever you can update a branch to match another by advancing its pointer through the commit history until it reaches the same commit. This process is known as a 'fast-forward' because it involves moving the pointer forward to the commit of the other branch without creating a new merge commit.

So after the fast-forward merge, the repository would look like this:

```{mermaid}
flowchart RL
    C2((C2)) --> C1((C1))
    C3((C3)) --> C2
    main --> C3
    feature --> C3
    HEAD{HEAD} --> main
```

```{admonition} What to notice
:class: hint
- Since `main` was behind `feature` by one commit, the `main` pointer was simply moved to the same commit as `feature` and now it points to `C3`.
- `feature` still points to `C3`.
- `HEAD` now points to `main` since in order to do the merge we had to switch first to `main`.
```

Now that we understand what a fast-forward merge is, let's see how to do it in Git. To perform a fast-forward merge, first switch to the branch you want to merge into, and then merge the other branch into it using `git merge <branch-name>`. For example, to merge `feature` into `main`:

```{code-cell} bash
git switch main
```

```{code-cell} bash
git merge feature
```
```{admonition} What to notice
:class: hint
- Git tell us that there was one file changed, file1.txt, and that there was 1 insertions (which we know is the third line).
```

```{code-cell} bash
git status
```

After the fast-forward merge, there are no changes to commit, the working tree is clean.

```{code-cell} bash
git log
```

We see that all the changes that we discussed in the diagram have been made. The `main` branch now points to the same commit as `feature`, and the `feature` branch still points to the same commit. The `HEAD` pointer is now pointing to `main`.

## Impact of switching branches on the working directory

We will now explore what happens to the working directory when we switch branches. To see this, let's first add a new file and make changes to an existing file on the `feature` branch, and then switch to the `main` branch.

```{code-cell} bash
git switch feature
touch file2.txt
echo "This is first line." >> file2.txt
echo "This is the fourth line." >> file1.txt
git add .
git commit -m "Add file2 and modify file1"
```

```{code-cell} bash
ls
cat file1.txt
```

```{code-cell} bash
git switch main
```

```{code-cell} bash
ls
cat file1.txt
```

```{admonition} What to notice
:class: hint
- We see that the file `file2.txt` is no longer in the working directory after switching to `main`.
- The changes made to `file1.txt` on the `feature` branch are removed after switching to `main`.
```

Git updates the files in your working directory to reflect the state of the files in the new branch. This means that any files unique to the previous branch but not present in the new one may be removed, and any files unique to the new branch may be added or modified.

## Switching branches with uncommitted changes

Git prevents loss of work by disallowing branch switching with uncommitted changes. To see this in action, let's make changes to `file1.txt` on the `feature` branch and then try to switch to `main` without committing the changes.

```{code-cell} bash
git switch feature
echo "This is the fifth line." >> file1.txt
git switch main
```

```{admonition} What to notice
:class: hint
- Git does not allow branch switching with uncommitted changes to protect against data loss.
```

## Modifying an staged file

Changes made after staging are not automatically included in the staged snapshot. To include changes in the staged snapshot, the file must be staged again.

```{code-cell} bash
git add file1.txt
echo "This is the sixth line." >> file1.txt
```

```{code-cell} bash
git status
```
```{admonition} What to notice
- The file `file1.txt` is staged and has uncommitted changes at the same time.
```

We can also see the status in a more compact form using the `-s` option: 

```{code-cell} bash
git status -s
```

The first character in the output of `git status -s` shows the status of the staged snapshot, and the second character shows the status of the working directory.

```{admonition} What to notice
-  As we saw before, with `git status`, `file1.txt` has both staged and not staged modifications.
```

Let's now stage the latest changes to `file1.txt`

```{code-cell} bash
git add file1.txt
```

```{code-cell} bash
git status -s
```

now all modifications has been staged and we can commit them:

```{code-cell} bash
git commit -m "Add fifth and sixth lines to file1.txt"
```

## Viewing all commits

When working with multiple branches in Git, you might find yourself on a branch that is behind others in terms of commits. For instance, if you're on the `main` branch that hasn't been updated with the latest commits from a `feature` branch, using the `git log` command while on `main` will only show the commit history up to the point main is currently at. This means you won't see the commits that are on `feature` or any other branch until they are merged into `main`.

This is because `git log` displays by default only the commit history of that branch, starting from the current commit and tracing back through the history of commits that lead to the current state of the branch.

Let's see this in action by using the `git log` command while on the `main` branch.

```{code-cell} bash
git switch main
git log
```

Now compare this with the output of `git log --all`:

```{code-cell} bash
git switch main
git log --all
```

```{admonition} What to notice
:class: hint
- Commits from `feature` are visible with `git log --all`, showing the comprehensive history across branches.
```

## Checking out a commit and the detached HEAD State
We have seen that we can move the `HEAD` pointer to a specific branch by using `git switch <branch-name>` but we can also move the `HEAD` pointer to a specific commit by using `git checkout <commit-hash>`. We can also checkout a commit relative to the current position of the branch pointer by using `git checkout <branch>~<number>`. This is useful for exploring the history of a repository.

```{code-cell} bash
git checkout main~3
```
  
When you check out a commit, you are in a detached HEAD state. This means that the `HEAD` pointer is no longer pointing to a branch, but to a specific commit. This is useful for inspecting the state of the repository at a specific point in time, but it is not recommended to make changes in this state. If you make changes and commit them, they will be based on the commit you checked out, not on the tip of any branch. This means that if you switch back to a branch, the changes you made in the detached HEAD state will not be part of the branch. To exit a detached HEAD state and retain your changes, you can create a new branch from the current commit:

```bash
git switch -c new-branch-name
```

This command creates and switch to the new branch (in one command) starting from the current commit, effectively bringing your HEAD back to a non-detached state and ensuring that any commits made in the detached HEAD state are not lost.
